Following the hearings on the Laredo Transfer
Bill in the House Higher Education Committee, it
was pretty obvious that the bill was not going
anywhere as far as the Higher Education Committee
was concerned. However, procedurally, there is a
way to bypass the committee. Would the Senate
amend a House bill and it be sent back to the House
for concurrence, then the bill would not be going
through committee. It would have to be a bill that
would be ruled as germane. So we immediately set
out to determine how many bills there might be that
were germane or could be ruled germane. to the
subject of transfer of Laredo from A&M system to
the University of Texas system. One bill in
particular that was germane was legislation that
would transfer the Baylor College of Dentistry
into the Texas A&M University system. This bill
was out of committee in the Senate and was
scheduled
for debate on the Senate floor.
Fortunately, the supporters of the Baylor
College of Dentistry in Dallas became aware of the
problem that could exist should their bill be
amended and began to lobby to see that it was not
amended. I understand that the Lieutenant
Governor took the position that the Baylor
College of Dentistry bill would not be amended.
and later took the position that no amendments to
transfer Laredo would be allowed on any of the
bills as far as he was personally concerned.
This was fortunate because I think that the
transfer of Laredo would have been viewed as a
weakness on the part of the Texas A&M University
system to allow this to happen. and would have
given the NM system a black eye for years to come. We
gained a position of some strength and the
system was not tarnished. In 1995, during the
session, I was also asked to work with the new
president of Prairie View to help him become
introduced and indoctrinated as to the Texas
legislature. I proceeded to introduce him to a
number of key members of the legislature,
one of which was the local state representative
from Bryan. The local representative was on the
conference committee of the appropriations bill
and immediately took an interest in the programs
at Prairie View and asked Dr. Hines to put together
a proposal on very short notice to provide a summer
intern program for high school students that
wished to attend Prairie View. They convinced the
president we had very little time to do this and
that the best way to do it was to do it with our
video telecommunication system hookup between
Austin and Prairie View. We went to the office,
got on the system, and he was able to work a program
up with his committee that was back on the campus in
Prairie View, and in a very short time, a matter of
hours, get a proposal to our local state
representative who was able to get it in the
appropriations bill. This kind of response is
very important in working with the Texas
legislature. There's very little time in a
legislative session to respond and react to
desires and wishes of the legislature. A
particular program and funding was not something
that the president of Prairie View was asking for,
but it was kind of dropped in his lap, so to speak.
There are good things that can happen during a
legislative session. if a person is there and is
alert and understands the process and knows what
he's doing. No substitute, however, for turning
out good students
that the moms and dads will tell state legislators
about and
therefore leaving an image of doing your work back
home, i.e. producing good students. It's to be a
cultivation of all members. so that they will
discuss issues with you freely and openly and even
seek you out. And this is something that takes a lot
of time and effort to cultivate the members
because there's a constant rotation of new
members coming into the legislature each
session. There's been a strong believer in the use
of our university presidents in addition to the
people that work at the system level. These CEOs
know their programs better than anyone and can
present them to members of the legislature. It
should be a coordinated effort in that the system
officials should be kept notified of what is going
on. There are conflicts between our system
agencies and a system university, particularly
Texas A&M University, but in each case these can be
worked out and avoided if the interested parties
are willing to work toward a compromise and let the
system officials handle the issue. The image of
Texas A&M University affects all components of
the system and for many years has been looked upon
as the system. Therefore, it's important that
Texas A&M University's image be one of very
highest regard as it reflects on everyone else.
On January 31, 1996, I
retired from my position as director of public
policy. And 30 days later, accepted a part-time
position with an agreement to perform a number of
tasks
with regards to working with the legislators and
maintaining the TAMIS Life program. The tasks
that were originally agreed to were later
rejected by my supervisor. And so for the past two
years,
time has been spent for whatever task might be
asked to perform. In the meantime, I have found
time to compile these memoirs. Otherwise, it
probably would not have been possible.
1996 was a red-letter year in another way. The
early 1980s several members of my family, myself,
and some friends chartered the Commerce National
Bank in College Station
and had been operating as a small independent bank
since. In 1996,
we were contacted by
the Compass Bank Organization, headquartered in
Birmingham, Alabama,
and began negotiations with regards to a stock
exchange merger. Compass is a publicly held stock
company that has branches in Alabama, Florida,
and the eastern part of Texas. The
merger was finally consummated in April of 1997
for some delays in the approval process that one
must go through with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. The 1997 session the legislature saw
me staying in College Station and monitoring the
session
over the internet.
The 1997 session was highlighted by the
appropriations process going back to its
old ways of being written in conference
committee. No new dollars were added until the
bill got to the conference committee. New
formulas were adopted in the Senate for higher
education and finally approved in the conference
committee, so very little was known about what was
in the appropriations bill until it was finally
written. an old axiom that the more open
government becomes, the more closed it will be. In
1990, I'm sorry, 1979, we had been operating under
a very open process in the conference committee,
but we found a way to make the system work in
conference committee when there needed to be some
private discussions.
I would meet with the Senate conferees in my
office, and this did not constitute a quorum since
I was only a member of one. From time to time, I would
invite another member colleague in the house on
the conference committee into the meeting always
holding it no more than two of us so that there was
never a quorum this was legal and we were able to
conduct the business that needed to be conducted
time a new legal approach was found for 1997 by
delaying all decisions until the conference
committee met. I seriously doubt that I could have
gotten away, so to speak, with such a procedure in
the time that I served as chairman of the
Appropriations Committee. I'm sure that we would
have had an uprising and rebellion in the House But
times do change and legislators have become more
tolerant. Some latitude needs to be provided to
legislature to meet in private sessions to
consult on certain issues. Under the present
system, even salaries of key employees must be set
in open session and discussed in such a setting.
In this environment, very little discussion
takes place, and this is not in the best interest of
good government. The old saying that there are two
things you don't want to watch, that is your
sausage and your laws being made, was never truer
than watching the appropriations process and how
funds are allocated through the appropriations
bill. This is the end of the very last tape.